As the books are closed, by and large, I mean, even collectors tend to keep their books lying around open.
They tend to keep them closed on shelves, in boxes, or whatever.
So they're protected from light.
The other thing is, most of the paintings that we know, most of the pictorial images that we know from museums, are painted in oral painting.
oil painting tends to discolor and tends to cause pigments to darken.
If you look at a 17th century Dutch painting, you'll see that all the green trees are often so dark that they're black, and it's because of chemical changes in the pigment.
With manuscripts, it's a tempera-based, an egg-based paint usually.
For whatever reason, they don't seem to go through that same chemical changes, and you seem to get
I'm quite certain that's true for almost all pigments.
They don't change really at all.
So basically, what you see here probably looks very much like what I looked at the time.
It looks like they could have been done a year ago.
Is the surface vellum?
The surface is vellum.
And vellum itself is a pretty tough substance if it's kept bound in the book.
So books are... I have a friend at the British Library who always says, manuscripts are tough, and that's why they survive, and that's why they look so great.
It's unbelievable.
That's 900 years old.
And it's a great object.
And one of the things I said when we bought the collection to the trustees was, if we buy this collection, we'll be one of the few museums in the world that represents the history of the painting from the early Middle Ages right up to the end of the 19th century.
Most museums don't collect
Manuscripts in most libraries don't collect paintings, so we do something that most institutions don't do.
That's very interesting.
That's interesting.
We have a great Van Gogh and a great autobiography manuscript.
What else is terrific here?
This is German 12-century Steinfeld.
It's a nice example.
It looks like it could be the original binding, too.
Are most of these original bindings?
No, most of them are not, actually.
We have relatively few.
In fact, even this, you can see the binding here.
This is a treasury binding here, which has a metal relief.
The book is 11th century, but the binding is actually 12th century.
So the binding was actually already changed before German.
These are rare, rare.
This is a South Italian miniature.
This is something I bought after Ridley, which are two, which were sold on a sale in 1983.
They're probably made in Sicily or southern Italy.
about by greek or byzantine artists this is this is the boethius manuscript that i was talking about in the show in this particular show we talk about how the apocalypse fits in
to the Middle Ages, the idea that there were certain kinds of vision literature that were popular.
Boethius is essentially about a vision.
Boethius was a Roman statesman who was accused of treason and thrown in jail.
He basically tries to reconcile himself to his fate.
In fact, he was ultimately executed, and this was written about years or
in the last couple of years before he died.
So it consists of a series of dialogue with a woman called philosophy, an abstraction called philosophy, where he debates good and evil and truth and moral and ethical issues.
But this was done in the 15th century by a great French painter, who's known only as the color TV master.
Actually, if you get it, you can see how figures are wonderfully beautifully drawn and painted.
How do you define illumination as opposed to illustration?
I mean, there is a standard definition, I guess, but how do you know of it?
Actually, I tend to use illustration.
All of these essentially are illustrations, but I think it's sort of from the technical point of view.
I tend to use illustration for printed books and illumination for painting or painted decoration in books.
Frankly, the tradition of illumination pretty much dies out by the end of the 16th century.
We actually have some 17th century illumination that's no longer actually a major and important art form.
It no longer attracts the great artists of the period.
So you can also sort of demarcate it chronologically pretty much.
But you generally distinguish the two as the illustration being in the printed book and the illumination being in the manuscripts.
Yeah, exactly.
Because the illumination in manuscripts tends to be painted decoration.
I mean, it is... I'm very pleased.
It took me years to... I had to pursue these things for years.
It was a private... Oh, thank you.
This artist we know is a painter as well.
There's a painting in the Louvre.
There's only one painting that survives by.
There's a painting in the Louvre, there's a set of drawings for tapestry designs that he did, which are major monumental works.
but most of the painted work that survives his influx.
Now how do you... did he sign these?
Did he sign or did he just determine... I signed Curly on Stylist and Laces.
We do have some circumstantial documentary evidence that suggests that these books were... that artists, specific known artists,
was this artist but we have no sign they as a rule did not sign their stuff so usually you need a documented book which is pretty rare or some strong circumstantial evidence but were any of these done in teams you know where we had a number of writers working on the same question i'll tell you what is likely is that the borders were often and initials were often painted by a different artist um it's perfectly and we actually i know of a miniature or two in our collection where it's clear by looking at it that there were two artists working on it but
We just don't know enough about it.
The degree of collaboration in a miniature itself is hard to determine.
I think these are probably all there.
There's a kind of consistency in the way they're painting.
Were they removed from text?
They would have been in a book about this big.
And in itself, the text in itself was very interesting.
There was this bizarre fashion in the 15th century to have certain texts written in both Latin and French.
And this book was written, the text was written in Latin and in French.
And in addition, there was a commentary on the text.
And because there were all these different texts running simultaneously, which essentially you were supposed to consult at the same time, some of the, there are other copies of this that I've looked at.
There are the columns that,
The texts themselves are arranged in these strange columns, and they sometimes curve in and out because it's so complicated.
They made the sort of text pages into a kind of beautifully designed ensemble so that they were nice to look at and not too intimidated because it was complicated.
It was weird, actually.
Do you think they have been removed from the text?
I have no idea.
For reasons that would be difficult to give, probably in the 20th century.
Probably...
Maybe in the early 20th century, but it's hard to know.
That's the wheel of fortune, yeah.
And if you look at the woman, if you look at the very back of her head, there's a dark face as well.
Fortune is sort of up and down, good and bad.
Good luck and bad luck.
Right.
Good and evil.
And she has both faces because fortune has two faces.
That detail is so fine.
I can't do that.
The other thing, of course, is the patrons of these people, they were employed by the kings of France and the dukes and duchesses at the court, where all the money and power was, was where these artists worked.
So at the very top of the society, and artists like this were also part of the household.
They were employees of the royal household or the ducal household or whatever.
This is the Roman de la Rose.
Do you know this text?
No.
This is one of the great medieval texts.
Roman de la Rose was an allegory of the search for love, and it was one of the really popular texts in the later Middle Ages, and it was also popular for artists.
There are probably more than 100 copies, illuminated copies, which is a lot of this text.
There are many, many more copies that weren't illuminated.
Actually, artistically, this is one of the finest ones.
It's probably from Paris from the beginning of the 15th century.
Do the illuminations correspond to the text?
Very closely.
And the story is of a dream.
And in fact, this shows that this is the story of, I forget what he's called, the lover in the book.
And he goes to bed, and in his bed, he begins to have a dream.
So it starts right with the beginning of the text.
And it's nice because it's not, they're not,
of a religious nature, and this is one of the lines.
Most of the great books are religious.
And in fact, that's an interesting point.
It's incredibly hard to get good secular manuscripts, and if there's one area where I'd like to do better, is to get a great illustrated Dante or something, I mean, to get a wonderful secular, some more wonderful secular manuscripts.
They're just really hard to find at this point.
This is the very few I've ever seen.
Is it such a romance from the early 15th century?
Yeah, it's a German book, actually.
Great.
This is one of the book's manuscripts.
This was probably his greatest manuscript.
I think, actually, maybe I sent you the book about this.
I recognize it, yeah.
This is called The Visions of Tanda.
In the Middle Ages, another popular genre of vision literature was about visions of hell.
And actually they were kind of fun stories because some spoiled knight, you know, in this story he becomes ill at a dinner party and goes into a coma and there he has his vision.
And then he's carried through hell and he has all these kinds of adventures where he's attacked by monsters and beasts nominally because he's committed this sin or that sin.
And he's, in a sense, punished already for his sins.
And all of this is a kind of warning that if you don't clean up your act, you're in big trouble.
But this is interesting.
This was also very, very popular.
We know that this text was translated into 15 languages.
It was written in the 12th century and was still popular in the 15th century when this book was made.
There are versions in Icelandic and there are several versions in Italian.
It was best-seller.
But this is the only non-illuminated copy.
So why was the Roman de la Rose illuminated over and over and over again and everybody had a copy?
And this was an equally popular text, but it was never realistic.
I don't know.
This stuff is extraordinary.
Actually, this is a new book because we do have a document for this book.
This is one of the few
a relatively human evil book that is very well documented.
The payments survive for the scribe, and the artist, and the binding.
The binding actually is lost.
The book was done in 1469, and the binding is probably early 16th century, so already it got damaged.
It must have been used a lot.
You see, the calligraphy in this book is spectacular.
This was the greatest of all the Burgundian scribes.
His name was Nicholas Spierink, and he worked for the Dukes of Burgundy.
This book, in fact, was made for Charles the Bold.
in 1469, shortly after he became Duke.
So, we have the documents.
You have the documents?
Well, they're in the archives in Brussels, but I mean, they exist.
The artist is named Levin Finlantham.
And in the documents, he's actually paid for completing the book and for taking it and delivering it to the binder in The Hague.
So he went from, I think it was Gantt or Brussels or something, to The Hague.
And he was paid a lot of money.
And for some reason, one of the things that's interesting about manuscript illumination is in Northern Europe, it was always a greater art form than in Italy.
In Italy, by this point, by 1469, you have your Renaissance, you have the Botticelli and, you know, Frangelico and your great artists.
Although you have the Antoinette at this time, the volume of great and important painting going on in Italy is far more than in the North.
But manuscript illumination as an original and vital and major art form
is more important in the north in places like this.
So these artists were very successful and they were very well played and they were among the best artists going on.
He used two different color inks in the polygraphy.
There's blue one and black.
And it was all meant to be beautiful and sumptuous.
One of the unfortunate things is the book is trimmed a little at the top.
I think you can see that.
Probably a little more space around it, the effect of all these flourishes would be even more elegant.
But it was a prayer book, and so it had to be small.
Small and personal, yeah, exactly.
And there are three pictures of the Duke praying in here, and his name appears in the book.
The thing is, these were meant to function as much as this particular book was a functional book.
Is that right?
Yes.
In theory, yes.
But one of the interesting things is, and I'll show you this when we get on sources, the number of the books that we required are in amazing condition.
You can't imagine that they were overhandled, except maybe once a month to show to your uncle or something like that.
So one wonders if they didn't have these items really primarily as prestige items,
and have, in fact, a fair book that they used that was dog-eared and had no illustrations or something, or became so heavily used that it was eventually discarded.
It's an interesting... I mean, they were functional in the purest sense, but whether in practice is hard to know.
But as you said, they had to rebind quite a number of them as well.
Well, in this case, that's true, actually.
And this book looks a bit more worn than some of the... And yet the eliminations stand up, which is extraordinary.
That's one of the great things.
Let's go downstairs.
This is the Spinal Hours.
This is this manuscript, which was completely unrecorded until 1976, when apparently a German, some German, a travel agent or something, bought it wrapped in newspaper or brown paper or something like that into the office at Sotheby's there and said he wanted to sell it.
And it's probably one of the great books of the 16th century.
And I think what I may have to do is I'll show you some slides for it when we get on.
It says it has 88 miniatures and has all kinds of fantastic illusionism and crazy things.
This is a very rare example where both pages were used for one miniature.
It's the Adoration of a Lamb who sort of gets lost in the gutter there.
It came into Sotheby's and that binding and that condition is amazing.
In fact, the interesting thing is not to sort of belabor the point, but
I have to say that since we bought this, well, we bought it, it was even whiter and purer and cleaner.
And when we first bought it, everybody wanted to see it in the world.
And any distinguished scholar who wanted to see it, you let them see it.
And we soon found that it actually didn't take very many people to handle it before the pages would yellow.
So now we make people wear gloves when they handle it.
It's still in wonderful condition.
It's all relative.
But it doesn't take much to make a book go yellow.
And I think it's 15, about 15, 15.
Yeah.
And it's one of the first majors in cinemascope.
Anyway.
As I said, he had great Flemish manuscripts.
The last book we looked right upstairs, the Spinella Hours, which was a two-page manuscript, that's one of the great Flemish ones.
This is another one of the manuscript, which is the History of Alexander.
And actually, the great patrons of this period were Philip the Good and Charles the Bold.
And this was a text.
that was commissioned, a translation that was commissioned by Charles the Bold, who's shown here.
And there are many copies.
In fact, this was one of the popular manuscripts that people at his court would buy.
He loved Alexander the Great.
He saw Alexander as being one of his heroes and models.
And then his courtiers would then buy, commission copies of the book for themselves so they could have the same books that the Duke had.
It was really, it was a fashion.
And it was this sort of fashion for illuminated books
a sort of glorious and prestigious items, and also because they told sort of adventurous stories, that was partially responsible for the flowering of this at the time.
So, anyway, so... But look, there's not any chipping at all anywhere.
I mean, I don't see any evidence of any... But there has been one bit of fudging.
Can you guess what that is?
Well... The book's been meddled with.
It has been, huh?
I can't see it.
Okay, well, you might not guess it, but if you look here, you'll see the red...
There was a rubric.
There was writing in there.
There was some kind of a dedication.
In fact, someone later covered it over in gold.
And I think actually this is where, this book was probably made for a member of the Kauai family, which is one of the great families at the Ducal Court.
And I think that we've never actually been able to decipher it entirely, but it probably makes some reference.
Have you tried to do x-rays work?
Yeah, we've tried everything.
It just doesn't come out fairly.
Whose seal is that?
Is that that little seal there, I wonder?
That's a good question.
That's a previous owner.
Well, obviously, there's a royal owner.
I'll show you some of the other pictures.
I don't even know that.
There are about 15 of them.
So this is the birth of Alexander.
And we get his exports.
And, of course, the great thing for us is that they told these stories in terms of their own time.
So they were costumes of their own day.
So what you see is
how the Gundyans dressed, not how Alexander dressed, not how the Macedonians dressed.
And this is circa what, did you say?
This is about 14, after 1475, maybe, probably not later than 1480.
Wow.
It was one of the great eras.
And which, what was the name of this one again?
This is called the History of Alexander the Great.
Okay.
Did all of these have pretty good provenance?
Yes, actually, I would say, as a rule, if you look through the provenances, you'll find that they all came from Beatty or Bison Perrins or Yates Thompson.
They're always, you see, it always seems like
The great collectors of illuminated manuscripts are relatively few and relatively well-known.
Almost all of them have their collections catalogued, and you can often trace these back.
This book, you can't, actually.
This one doesn't have much of a colonoscopy, but most of them do.
Actually, we don't buy that much stuff that doesn't have some kind of a pedigree, not so much by design as just by that seems to be the way it is.
The sphenola was an exception, although the sphenola, ours,
upstairs, although we didn't know where it was.
The coup ended in 1976.
The binding is an 18th century binding of the Spinella family.
And the Spinella family is an identical binding with the Spinella photovances on the Tres-Ris-sur of the Duc de Berry, which is perhaps the most famous of all of the manuscripts.
So they, at one time, were in the same family.
My glasses can't pick out.
Is that a pencil marker?
That's a modern foliation, yeah.
There's the original foliation.
That's what, 180, 190.
That's unbelievable.
It really is.
Magnificent.
Just a little Bible.
Very much thank you.
Because I think also, I mean, in the case of the kind of the text, I mean, the Duke really saw Alexander the Great as his great forerunner, because he also saw himself as a conqueror.
So there was real political meaning to the choice of text and all that.
This is another great... We'll use our gloves for this one, I guess.
Yeah, and it took us off like a temple a lot.
Um, and this was actually a Rothschild manuscript, and it was in, uh, and it was at Palmersfelden as well, the Counts of Schönborn, so it has a very distinguished provenance.
And we know who it was made for.
It was made for Albrecht of Brandenburg.
Brandenburg was one of, uh, actually, Brandenburg was the guy who was the Archbishop of, uh, I guess, Mainz when the famous theses of, uh, Martin Luther were tacked on the
on the cathedral at Worms, and it really wasn't the protest of what people like Brandenburg were doing, which was spending their money on good living and great artists and fancy books and selling indulgences to pay for them.
Look at that.
That's the Brandenburg Code of Arms.
And as I say, he had paintings by Dror and Grunewald and most of the great German artists.
And this book he particularly loved, and he also commissioned a couple of German artists to make copies of it.
The book is also, it's one of the rare medieval manuscripts that exist in copies where all the illuminations are copied as well as the text.
How many illuminations in that book?
It says, I think it's 39 or 40.
How long do you think it would take to produce one of those?
Did you ever give them any thought?
No idea.
Yeah, people ask this question all the time, and I think a book like this probably would have, it's hard to know how fast they actually worked, and it depended to some extent on how many artists were involved.
In this case, I think,
It looks like the artist painted everything.
It might have taken a year.
But we really don't know.
That's just a guess.
Extraordinary.
But it would be difficult to find a painting, let's say by a contemporary painting, like Bernard von Orly or Quentin Metzise, who's one of the great Flemish artists.
You couldn't find a painting by them in this condition.
Find a bigger object.
But you couldn't find something that's splendidly preserved.
Exquisite.
Excuse me a second.
It's really something.
Thank you.
We'll go to the... Now, the most beautiful miniatures are actually at the end of The Passion of Christ.
Oh, God.
I mean, the early 16th century is still considered to be a major period for Flemish painting.
But when we talk about Flemish painting in the textbooks, they don't talk about Flemish manuscripts.
But from our mind, the quality of the originality of it is as great.
What did you call this one again?
This is called the Pro Book of Albrecht for Bannenberg.
Something that even we, in a sense, haven't figured out how to resolve.
This is a book that does tell us, it's a pro-book, and it has different pros which have been related to the story of the Passion, the story of Christ.
But it tells a continuous narrative.
And in fact, as a work of art, I discovered when I first looked at this at the Ludwig's house, as you go through it and you turn the pages and you see this sort of Christ going through all this, it actually is a very, very moving story.
I mean, it's called an incredible detail, and you see Christ is represented as a very sort of sympathetic and very human figure.
And it really works on a certain aesthetic level from the handling of the book and the turning of the pages looking like the images.
But, of course, in the museum, in the gallery camp, there's no way you can turn the pages to people.
How did Ludwig present these?
As books in a library?
Or did he have them... He just kept them stored on shelves.
And so I don't know the extent to which he... He didn't actually have any in the house.
Sorry.
Oh, okay.
Is this a copy we can...
Yeah.
OK.
Is that what you want to discuss?
Yeah, is that what you want to think?
So I don't know how he actually handled them.
He actually didn't, as I say, kept them mostly stored in the museum in Cologne.
I think actually he did live with art.
I mean, there was a terrific Rauschenberg hanging in his bedroom.
I mean, there were objects all over the house.
I mean, he definitely lived with the objects.
But how he lived with the books is less clear to me.
I felt, I mean, it's how it's corny to say this, but the first time I looked at it, it was profoundly moving, you know?
There aren't that many works of art that you could look at that, in a sense, really, you found very moving.
But this was one, Christ was always trying to say, this is a very sort of vulnerable, very human sort of figure.
There's also a period when, in the literature of the time, and in the whole devotional practice, the whole culture of this period, the idea was that you were supposed to empathize with Christ in this very powerful way and identify with his suffering.
And so, even when it borders on the somewhat graphic, the point is to draw in the devout, the reader, the viewer, into a story that's very powerful and very moving.
And it works, actually, and it's very remarkable.
It's a great object.
Isn't that wonderful?
Well, 1530.
Yeah, 1520 o'clock.
So this competed with printing, to a degree.
I guess printing for a period, right?
Yeah, there was this funny, famous story about Federico de Montefalto, where he said that he wouldn't have any printed books in his library, that he took the printed books and had them copied into manuscripts and brought printed books.
I mean, there was initially this kind of reaction against printing.
I mean, eventually, actually, 1530 is fairly late.
There are relatively few great artists left working, and by actually the middle of the century,
The great aluminum manuscripts that are produced are really oddballs.
By then, the illustrated printing book is much more important.
So, in a sense, this belongs to one of the last great objects of the tradition.
But, I mean, for 50 years, well, the Gutenberg Bibles of the 1450s, so for, I would say, 75 or 80 years after that, it's still a very serious art form.
It still sort of hangs in there.
But these books are made for the emperor, the king, the duke.
Who is it that wouldn't have a printed book?
I think it was Federico de Montecaltro was the famous... No, no, no, that's fine.
I'm going to get up anyway.
I just want to make sure.
Can you see?
Yeah, it's just so beautiful.
That's a nice little story.
I'll see if I can actually dig it out.
I think it's written somewhere.
That's the kind of stuff I like.
I can use it, you know.
That's just nice.
It's magnificent.
It took me a week to go through it.
Look at the sky.
Never mind.
I mean, he's got the textures there and the clouds and the bricks.
I mean, working...
What kind of brushes did they have?
There is actually a famous self book that I've had late in his life where he's wearing glasses, actually.
He probably says something about the patterns.
But they must have used very fun.
I mean, the sort of proverbial one-hair brush or something like it must have been used to be... Anyway, so these are... So this, this phenol... The Alexander the Great, the ones we just looked at,
are things that were in Ludwig.
I'll show you some Flemish things that we have since then.
Number 20.
Looking at number 20.
This is
This one here?
Yep.
It's called a model book of calligraphy.
That's what we call it in English.
Now, what is this?
The history of this book is, this is a model book of calligraphy, which also has an interesting, rather bizarre story.
The text, every page is a different calligraphic sample.
And the whole sort of,
genre of model books of this type, grows up from the fact that in the 16th century, once printing press begins to take hold, people want to learn how to read, and they want to learn how to write.
Now that that grows a desire to have books about calligraphy and different styles of writing so that people can learn them.
So they were essentially educational tools.
And then within that genre, there goes out a sort of mini genre of deluxe model books of calligraphy, which were also showpieces.
So this was done by the court secretary of the emperor Ferdinand I,
in Vienna as a kind of show-off piece to show how good he was, an elegant manuscript for the emperor.
Ferdinand's grandson, Rudolf II, was one of the great art patrons of Central Europe at the end of the 16th century, then took the book and commissioned an artist at his court about 30 years later to add the decoration.
So the book was made, actually, in two campaigns.
And that was declared that much later.
30 years, though.
So they just left the thing in storage all that time waiting for it?
Well, I should know.
He probably looked at it and showed it to his friends and everything.
Because a beautiful holographic model would have been as well.
What if they left space for the illustrations, though?
Yeah, exactly.
Well, it's not clear, actually, what was intended.
But I suspect, yeah, I think that's probably true.
But we don't know for sure.
And what he did, the artist did this brilliant job of sort of making the two work as one image.
And certainly the calligraphy is there, and they left... And there was a space, yeah.
But it was intended, it probably was intended, actually, but it's hard to, one can always wear the space.
Oh, sure, look at that.
I mean, where the calligraphy comes down.
It's almost as if the calligrapher worked with the artist, almost.
Well, it seems like it seems like.
Yeah, almost.
Anything with words is part of the original, and all these little flourishes in the same color.
That's all part of the written thing.
Are all the illustrations flowers, fruits, botany type things?
Well, actually not all, but most.
Look at that.
Unless you said it's Flemish, I think, is that right?
Well, it's interesting.
It was made by Gerard Kufnaga, who was an artist from Antwerp, and it's essentially a Flemish artist, but who worked at the Habsburg Court in Munich in Vienna.
And the book was written by a Croatian artist who was working in Vienna and illuminated by a Flemish artist working in Vienna.
So we call it Flemish.
You have a pretty good history on it, don't you?
Yeah, it's exceptionally well documented.
That is really extraordinary.
Isn't that something?
Yeah.
I mean, I've been going to all the sales in New York.
I haven't seen anything like that.
Well, believe me, Stephen comes to the sales room.
This was sort of chased.
Oh, here, now, this is fun.
This is a mirror writing.
Leonardo used to write in mirror writing, which is basically just backwards.
Yeah, why would he include it just as a sample?
It's just a sample of another type of writing, another sort of... It's basically a sort of show-off piece.
So...
There are many that exist, but very few with terrific illuminations.
Also, most often the calligraphic model books were printed, and there are many printed examples.
And there are actually book collectors, there are lots of calligraphic models that exist without, most of the decoration is with pen flourishes, not with painting.
You know who collected those?
Peeps.
I was in Peeps' library last year, and he had a marvelous... He created... He wanted to create the illusion that he'd laced this sort of pod through the vellum.
That's making good sense of both sides.
So, yeah.
The hook was a riot.
And it's a unique volume, right?
Yes, it's a unique volume.
There is...
There's one other book written by this scribe which this artist illuminated also.
The separation in time was 20 years or something.
And there's a missile that he illuminated.
And actually the most interesting of all is Hufnagel owned a Flemish Book of Hours from around 1470, at the same time as that Alexander manuscript that we looked at, a very beautiful little book of hours, which had
illusionistic flowers and insects from the time painted in, and then he took it and added his own, so that they're like late 15th century flowers and fruit, and then there's late 16th century, it's in the Royal Library of Blessings, and it's absolutely fabulous.
It's a great thing.
Was this for instructional purposes?
Well, this again was a little bit, it's a little bit like the Book of Hours, the thing that you were talking about.
Nominally, it was for instructional purposes, but it became a sort of precious object.
They were show pieces, you know, sort of like pulling out your Van Goghs and your Rembrandts.
Have these ever been done in facsimile?
No, we're working actually on this now.
As it happens, the Associate Curator of Drawings, Lee Hendricks, did her dissertation on another Hoofnagle manuscript, and so she and
A German scholar who we commissioned have written a facsimile, which is hopefully the first one we publish.
But I mean, you would do all the illustrations.
Yeah, everything.
We hope it'll be out by next Christmas.
Not this Christmas.
And you'll publish that with your imprint, the Getty imprint?
Yeah, it'll be printed probably in England or in Switzerland, but we're going to try to do it ourselves.
I'll buy one, for sure.
Yeah, that's a great thing.
Now, this is interesting, too.
This is on paper.
which was painted black, because you couldn't dye, in a sense, a piece of vellum, but I thought it was difficult to do it successfully.
But he really wanted to do that, you see.
I mean, he really had to go to great lengths to get that, to get all his effects.
And it's one of the things.
And then at the end, now this is a different, this section here was, oh there, let's see, let's find something from, this is good, oh there.
It was added by Hufnagel later.
It's on a different vellum, you can tell, but it's something different, and it's all, the decoration is in Hufnagel's own hand.
And it's called, it's a section on how to construct the letters of the alphabet, which is also, again, yeah, see the geometry.
That's the study of calligraphy, huh?
So then it has all these crazy, this is sort of more crazy manners.
I can't believe it.
Look at the head on that.
It's almost a human head on the dog, isn't it?
Yeah.
Eyebrows and an expression.
That's beautiful, too, the ostriches.
It's going to be a wonderful publication.
Yes, it's a great book.
And you'll do it to size, I guess.
Yes, absolutely.
It's going to be hard to do because it's so big that it'll be very expensive, but we thought we should do it.
And it was made for Rudolf II.
That's the double eagle, which is the Habsburg emblem.
And then Hufnagel in German is hoof and nail.
And the hoof and nail is the signature.
And the G is Georg.
And there's a date in 1596.
So everything you could want in the book.
It's wonderful.
You can even see a little sense of humor in there, too.
Yeah, no, there is.
But the thing is, this is a very, and that's a good point, because this is
This is it.
This is the end of manuscript illumination as an art form.
1596 is incredibly late.
And in the 17th century, there are really no major manuscript illuminators at all.
In the north, Hufnaga is probably the last great one.
And in fact, there are only about six books that he illuminated that survived.
He's better known for prints and drawings and watercolors.
Actually, next year we're going to do a show around this book on the facsimile comes out, which would be really neat.
Because he's the last great manuscript illuminator.
But his studies of flowers and fruit were incredibly important for the Dutch still life painters.
So he stands sort of pivotally between a medieval tradition and a modern tradition.
And this is one that you, this is not, again, this is not part of Ludwig.
This is one of the subsequent, that gives you a special degree of satisfaction, I'm sure, because you've located that, I gather.
Yeah, that's fun.
That's pretty neat.
Chase down the owner.
Who wouldn't chase down the owner?